Thank you, Victoria.
Are we waiting for Michael as well? Oh, yes.
I can see he is coming online now. Yeah.
Thank you so much for your submission.
We have 10 minutes with you. Thanks.
Thank you. And thank you for the time to speak
with you this afternoon on behalf
of the New Zealand Law Society.
Um, I'm Victoria Fowler.
I'm counsel at Web Henderson, uh,
with a practice focusing on, um, regulatory litigation
and advice on competition
and consumer issues, um,
with a particular focus on matters
regulated by the Commerce Commission.
So appreciate the opportunity to speak
with you about these important changes to the Commerce Act.
Um, appearing with Michael Tilly,
who is a competition lawyer at Til and Co.
And, um, former Chief Legal Counsel Competition
and head of Mergers at the Commerce Commission.
Um, we are both here in our capacity as members
of the Law Society More Reform Committee.
Um, as committee members.
We, uh, along with others,
provided feedback on the bill to the Law Society
to assist them in drafting the submission you have for you.
Um, so the, the Law Society supports the bill's intention
to update and modernize competition settings, um,
and subject to some amendments.
We support the continued passage of the bill.
Um, in our time today, we'll focus on a, a couple of the,
the biggest concerns that we have, um, in order
to lose some time for questions.
Um, but the, the written submission you have
before you goes into detail about some, some changes
that the law society considers are required, um, for the,
uh, proper functioning of the changes.
Um, the, before I move on to talk about one of the, uh,
key par parts that we'd like to discuss today, um, I wanted
to touch on a general view on alignment with international,
uh, comparators.
So we, we generally support greater alignment, particularly
with Australian settings,
unless there is a good reason to diverge, um,
changing New Zealand law in a way that doesn't align
with equivalent jurisdictions.
And in particular with Australia,
it increases legal uncertainty,
and so that can affect investment
and competition in New Zealand markets.
Uh, so while that is the, the sort of default setting, uh,
we do think that there are some circumstances in which it's
reasonable to diverge from the position in Australia.
Uh, and one of the parts of the changes
that we think falls into that category, um, is the,
the changes to the substantially lessening
of competition test.
Um, so the, the SLC test is intended to ensure
that mergers are not going
to undermine the competitive market structure
of the industry that's affected by a particular merger.
The, the bill proposes to introduce new wording so
that the SLC test will, uh, effectively consider a merger,
a, a killer acquisition if it creates strengthens
or entrenches a substantial degree of power in the market.
Uh, so those words were imported into the wording
of the Australian SLC test, um, in Australia
that is restricted in application to just merger control.
Um, so that's different to the way
that the current bill is drafted in New Zealand,
which proposes to expand the SLC test across the board,
so including in, in restrictive trade practices.
Um, so that expands the test further than in Australia.
Uh, the, the Law society's recommendation is
that no change is made to the SLC test at all.
Um, we consider that divergence from Australia in, in
that case is reasonable, primarily
because there is minimal evidence of a problem
to be solved in New Zealand.
Um, that's especially so given the additional powers
that are proposed to be granted to the commission, um,
that would address any potential risk in a more targeted
and responsive way.
So, uh, the, the primary submission, um, is that the,
the clause amending the SLC test is deleted in its entirety.
Um, but, but if it is to be pursued at very least
that it should be narrowed in its application, um, so that,
like in Australia, it only applies to mergers.
Uh, so, uh, that is the, the submission on that point.
And I'll pass over to Mr.
Tilley now to address the next points.
Thank you, Victoria. Good afternoon, everybody.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear.
Um, the next submission is on predatory pricing.
So, as with the SLC test changes, the explanatory materials
to the bill disclosed little evidence of an issue
with predatory pricing in New Zealand
that requires amendments to the act.
We think it's also important to note
that the cost test proposed
for the new prohibition did not increase New Zealand's
alignment with comparative
jurisdictions as the bill intends.
We would also note that section 36 of the act, so the,
the prohibition on the misuse of market power,
which currently deals with predatory pricing,
it's currently, uh, less than three years old in its current
form and has
therefore not been enforced long enough
to determine its effectiveness.
So overall, the proposed change risks damaging business
confidence in decision making on pricing.
In a way that means that large businesses are likely
to respond by pricing things higher to be on the safe side,
resulting in negative impacts for consumers.
So we would recommend that the predatory pricing changes are
not, uh, pursued in the bill.
I'll now move on to the final point on which we would like
to submit today, which is the confidential information.
So the bill proposes
to insert significant restrictions on the operation
of the Official Information Act in relation
to official information held by the Commerce Commission.
We're referring here to clause 53,
which proposes new restrictions on the OIA.
The OIA is a key mechanism
by which government bodies are held
accountable for their activities.
It already provides withholding grounds for the provision
of confidential information as well
as commercially sensitive information
as set out in the submission.
The policy problem here seems
to be initial perception rather than reality
in the view of the law society.
The more nuanced option
provided in the regulatory impact statements, that
that alternative procedural
and institutional improvements could be
pursued, would be preferable.
This could look like providing Commerce Commission staff
with additional training and guidance from the ombudsman on
the application of the OIA and where
and when the withholding provisions can be used
for commercially sensitive and confidential information.
This would likely translate into improved communication
with businesses and individuals about the risks
of information they provide being released, as well
as improved practice in recognizing when
and where the existing withholding provisions
of the OIA should apply, leading
to improved confidence in sharing the relevant
information with the commission.
Those are our submissions. Um, happy to take any questions.
Good, uh, questions on this. Um, Dr. David Wilson.
Um, this predatory pricing issue just keeps coming up
and we are not getting alignment today in terms
of preference on what should happen with this.
We had a presentation from the University of Sydney,
which says that we are currently in a situation, we have
vertical integration, dual conflicts, in other words,
competing with your own suppliers, uh,
promotional discounts, results, um,
exclusive dealing pricing algorithms
and so on that take advantage of a whole bunch of things.
So you could say that this is monopolistic behavior, um,
and we've had, I think, real problems trying
to understand whether or not there is actually predatory
pricing already going on.
So I think a number of us would think that there is,
and a number of the consumers would think that there is.
Um, so you are against, uh, trying
to address this in the way that we have.
Can you provide us with the way that you believe
that there actually is a way forward to, in, you know, give
consumers confidence that we are addressing this issue?
Um, sure.
I mean, I think that that's a, um, that's a, a, a, a policy,
a policy issue and, and we'd be happy to take a look at,
at any, any drafting or any alternative drafting.
I think our message here today is that, um,
the surrounding materials to the bill
do not provide strong evidence
or do not disclose to us that there is an issue to be,
um, to be addressed.
All right. Um, thank you for your submission. Thank you.
Uh, next we have civil contractors,
New Zealand, again on Zoom.
Excellent. Uh, can you hear us, Madam
Chair? Yes.
Uh, we can hear you, but we can't see you,
but that's totally fine if you Oh, yeah.
Uh, I can see freezer now. Um, got it. Thanks.
You as well, Alan. Thank you so much.
And we have 10 minutes with you. Thank you.
Brilliant. Hey, thank you. Thanks, Madam Chair,
the opportunity to, to address you.
So I'm a Pollard, I'm Chief executive,
the civil contractor, New Zealand.
I'm joined online by my colleague Fraser Mo,
who's our communications and advocacy manager.
Um, or obviously take our submission
as Reid will only be, uh, brief.
There's really three things that I want to emphasize.
The first is, we're really concerned to make sure
that we continue to support, um,
and allow the positive collaborative model set to exist
for project delivery.
So Alliance has joint ventures, panels all used
with the client, or one
or more other parties worked together to deliver a project
early supplier engagement.
Also, part of that is used to, uh, to ensure
that designs are practical
and that can include collaboration
between competing firms under a single client as well.
I mean, these models have been proven to add value
where the project scope
and risks are uncertain, uh,
where there's significant time constraints,
where it's a technically challenging project
where there could be external, uh, complex external factors
where innovative solutions are needed.
Flexibility is important.
The collective approach helps manage risk,
and there's an expectation
of knowledge sharing between the parties.
Um, they are currently embedded in very large infrastructure
projects in New Zealand.
They're often codified in the contract.
So we support healthy competition on the market,
but we are concerned that any changes must ensure
that this positive collaboration continue.
And to put that in context,
the C committee will have seen the announcement on Tuesday,
uh, by the infrastructure commission with a 30 year plan,
some very significant project on the 272 70
$5 billion pipeline.
Many of those are gonna rely on these collaborative
structures, uh, remaining, uh, as acceptable, uh,
to the business and legal community.
Uh, it's our submission that, uh, the Regi,
the legislation does risk jeopardizing these
models in its current form.
And we, uh, if that is the case,
we would hope the Commerce Commission would make immediate
class exemptions, uh, to allow them to continue.
Um, secondly, we support efforts, uh,
to combat predatory pricing.
We urge the committee
and the commission to be mindful though
of any unintended consequences.
There's many situations where businesses offer discount
or lower prices, or they might offer to work at
or below cost because of some community.
Good. And these are positive,
as we pointed in our submission.
There may be cases where prices are lowered for the benefit
of communities, for example, constructing, uh,
walking tracks for public good in partnership,
the charitable community groups as it stands,
we are concerned that, uh,
the provisions may not allow for this.
Uh, we also want the commission
to be mindful about the role procurement practices play in
determining prices that, uh, eventually paid for contracts.
You, you may be aware of the past 18 months,
our industry has suffered from a significant lack
of work being brought to market,
and that has resulted sometimes in projects being tended,
um, below cost just to keep teams busy, uh,
rather than lay them off.
There are examples where clients have used that market
situation to force prices down even further.
Um, the third point is we really need
to avoid unnecessary regulatory burden, such as the risk
of New Zealand religious reform, disadvan disadvantaging,
our New Zealand businesses compared
to our Australian cousins.
We do lose businesses when that happens.
So we know that in Australia conduct creating, strengthening
or entrenching a substantial degree of power in the market
only relates to acquisitions.
But in New Zealand, from what we read, it's intended
to apply to all Commerce Act prohibition.
So we believe that's too broad
and will most likely stifle competition.
Um, can I invite my colleague, uh, to add any comments
that he would like to make?
Yeah. Okay. Thanks Alan.
Um, and, um, greeting committee, uh, I'd just like
to comment briefly around a little more detail
around re regulatory burden.
As, as Alan's already commented, um,
we've got some infrastructure affordability issues and,
and we believe that some of that does come down
to regulatory burden.
So, um, really the points around notifications.
So, um, the amount of notification
and the confusion they may cause.
Um, we're not quite certain what, how, how much of
that this legislative form will generate for the industry.
And, um, if we're looking to make,
make projects more efficient
and bring 'em to market, uh, swiftly, um, I mean,
for example, I might just give you one of the clauses
that require that,
that gives the commission 30 working days to respond.
And, um, if they do not respond, then they're deemed to,
to have declined to give the clearance.
And that's, uh, clause 65 BA
and um, four.
Um, and if you apply that to collective bargaining with, um,
two or more persons who supply
or require goods, it's quite a lot of notification
and quite a lot of room there for, um,
perhaps accidental decline or,
or, you know, capacity to deal with that.
So this is an example of where regulatory burden can kind
of slow down infrastructure projects.
If these kind of class exemptions, I mean,
for recognized working models aren't, aren't, um, allowed
or looked at in detail
and without clear guidance, it's really hard for us
to know if that will be, you know,
the changes will be successful.
I mean, in summary, we, we, we support the provisions
and to foster competition,
but um, we we're not sure what's proposed.
Um, we'll streamline as intended,
and um, you know, we just ask you to consider that.
And, um, tha thank you very much for taking the time
to hear us and um, we,
we'd welcome any questions that you have for us.
Any questions, Travis? So a quick question.
So, um, what I understand is you're saying
that your industry works, um,
slightly differently from other industries, uh, given, uh,
there has been a reduction in work recently.
When you say work differently, uh, can you elaborate?
Mean contracts, availability of contracts?
So I don't understand the question you're asking.
So, um, so in the, um,
because you are, um,
when we talk about the infrastructure construction industry,
so are you saying that, um,
because of a lack of projects, uh, the behavior
has changed in the recent months
and it operate differently from other industries?
So I if we compare with other industries,
so you think this won't happen in other industries
and it's specific to, uh,
the infrastructure construction industry.
Um, o obviously our familiar familiarity is only
with construction, but I can say that, uh, vertical
and horizontal parts
of the construction sector have
experienced the same challenges.
So what we've seen, uh, as we mentioned is, uh,
if you like some, um, um, low balling if, for want
of a better word, of contracted prices to take advantage
of the fact that contractors, myself had little or no work.
Mm-hmm. If I could just build on that.
So in terms of the previous submitter
and the point that they made, um,
it's often a procurement issue.
So, you know, a lot of this is actually handled through,
because we are working on public sector contracts in terms
of government contracts
or consulate contracts for local government.
Um, a lot of the terms are set through those,
through the procurement terms of, of government.
And um, also a lot of, a lot of the behavior is driven
through procurement.
So, uh, perhaps part of our submission is
that the solution could set at a procurement level rather
than a legislative level.
And, um, that may be appropriate.
And this case, because a lot
of these things are already handled in detail in procurement
and in the construction contracts that we work under, um,
the, the, the fact of having, uh, dealt with
through another piece of legislation adds confusion
and, um, reduces certainty for our, for our members who,
who already know how, how the system works, um, under,
under their, under their tendering
to their, to their clients.
Um, so yeah, that, that's, that's possibly
a better way, a good way to put that.
Um, does that make sense?
And that's, that's good. Thank you so much.
Any questions, members? No thank you. No, no questions.
Thank you so much for your submission. Thank
You very much. Thank you.
Alright, with that members,
we have concluded hearing from submitters for today.